UNIVERSITY OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
FACULTY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Lesson #8:
CONTINUOUS DELIVERY &
DEPLOYMENT (CD)
THAI NGUYEN, MONTH … YEAR 2025
Lesson objectives
1Understand the CD process
Master the continuous delivery (CD pipeline) and continuous
deployment processes. 2Package applications with Docker
Know how to package applications as images with Docker. 3Apply CD with Jenkins
Combine Jenkins with Docker to build an effective CD process.
University of Information and Communication
Technology
Main content
1Continuous delivery & deployment process - CD
2Package applications with Docker
CD practice with Jenkins
University of Information and Communication
TechnologyUsing Docker with Command Line Tools & Docker Compose3
1. Continuous Delivery (CD) Process
❑Continuous Delivery Process = CI +
deploy application to deployment
environments, but deploying to the end -
user environment (Prod) is still manual. University of Information and Communication
Technology
1.
Continuous Deployment Process
Continuous Deployment = CI
+ CD, but automates
deployment to the end -user
environment (Prod). University of Information and Communication
Technology
2.
Package applications with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core Docker directives
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container of the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to run a test
University of Information and Communication
Technology
a.
Docker – Introduction
❑In recent years, a particular technology has attracted attention
in the market, on social networks and at events, namely Docker. ❑Docker is an open source containerization tool from 2013,
which allows isolating applications from the server system. ▪Helps applications become mobile, can be tested on the developer's
workstation and deployed to the production environment without
worrying about runtime dependencies.
▪It is a cross -platform tool, can be installed on Windows, Linux,
macOS, ...and is available by default on some cloud providers such as
AWS, Azure, ... University of Information and Communication
Technology
Container
A system that embeds the application with its dependencies, containing only a lightweight operating system and
the necessary elements.
Comparison with VM
Unlike virtual machines (VMs) that contain a full operating system, containers rely on the guest operating system
(the container only contains a lightweight operating system (OS) and the elements necessary for that operating
system such as system libraries, binary files and code dependencies). Portability
Docker makes applications portable by building images that are easy to deploy across different environments
without compatibility issues. University of Information and Communication
Technologya.
Docker – Introduction
❑To operate,  Docker  needs  the following  elements :
▪Docker  Desktop  UI: manage  containers
▪Docker  client : Is a command  line tool (docker)  that you
use to give commands,  for example : docker  run, docker
build,  ... ▪Docker  daemon : Is the "engine"  of Docker,  responsible
for: Managing  containers,  images,  networks,  volumes ;
Executing  commands  from  the Docker  Client .
▪Docker  Registry : This is a public  repository  (Docker  Hub)
or a private  repository  of Docker  images  (account
registration  required)
In Docker Desktop, Docker Client and Docker Daemon are
available → run directly on Desktop (Windows /Mac/Linux). Docker Desktop only connects to Docker Hub by default
a. Docker – Introduction
2.
Package applications with Docker a)Introduction b)Register & Explore Docker Hub c)Install
Docker Desktop on Windows d)Check installation & view Docker commands e)Key elements of
Docker f)Main/core directives of Docker g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile i)Initialize a new Container from the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and Communications  Docker Hub is a public space
(registry) containing over 2 million public Docker images from companies, communities, and
To register, visit https://hub.docker.com/, fill in the
information and click "Sign Up". This account allows us to
upload arbitrary images and download Docker Desktop. After logging in, we can explore the available images in
the "Explore" section, with filters to search for official
images, from verified publishers, or certified by Docker
(Screenshot – Slide below)
University of Information Technology and
Communications
Registered with account ptthuong@ictu.edu.vnb. Register & Explore Docker Hub
b.
Register & Explore Docker Hub
University of Information Technology and
Communications
b. Register & Explore Docker Hub
University of Information Technology and
Communications
b. Register & Explore Docker Hub
2.
Package applications with Docker a)Introduction b)Register & Explore Docker Hub c)Install
Docker Desktop on Windows d)Check installation & view Docker commands e)Key elements of
Docker f)Main/core directives of Docker g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile i)Initialize a new Container from the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and Communications  ❑Docker Desktop is a cross
-platform tool, free for developers and small teams.
To install on Windows, we need to ensure:
•Windows 10/11 64 -bit with at least 4GB RAM. •Windows Subsystem for Linux 2 (WSL 2) backend or Hyper -V is enabled. ❑Installation:
(1) Download the installation file from the Docker Desktop for Windows page, then run the .EXE
file and configure the components for the WSL 2 backend. After the installation is complete; (2)
Launch Docker Desktop and log in to Docker Hub. => Specifically as follows:
University of Information Technology and
Communicationsc. Install Docker Desktop on Windows
c.
Install Docker Desktop on Windows
(1) Download  Docker  Desktop  by
clicking  on the Docker  Desktop  for
Windows  button  on the page :
https ://docs .docker .com/desktop/wind
ows/install/
▪Screenshot :
c. Install Docker Desktop on Windows
❑Installation  & configuration :
Click  on the downloaded
executable  file (.EXE)  to install,
during  the installation  we need  to
install  the components  for the
WSL  2 backend,  by checking  the
box (as shown  in screen  1):
Successful  installation  result :
screen  2
c.
Install Docker Desktop on Windows
(2) Launch  Docker  Desktop,  register  & log in
to Docker  Hub. ❑Startup  Docker  Desktop  as shown  in the
screenshot :
❑Register  & Login  to Docker  Hub (at the Docker
Desktop  screen)
=> Result : screenshot  (slide  below)
2.
Package applications with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container from the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
d.
Check installation
& view Docker
commands
❑To see the Docker commands,
open DOS, or PowerShell and
execute the command:
docker --help
❑To check the installed Docker
version, run the command:
docker --version
University of Information Technology and
Communications
2.
Packaging applications with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container from the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
1.
Docker Image
A basic element of Docker, created
from a Dockerfile, containing the
binaries and application files to be
packaged.2. Docker Registry
A centralized storage system for
shared Docker images, which can be
public (Docker Hub) or private (ACR).3. Container
An instance executed from a Docker
image, where the application will run. There can be multiple instances from
the same image. 4. Volume
Physical storage space on the host OS, outside the container,
that can be shared between multiple containers to store data.5.
Dockerfile
A basic element of Docker, containing instructions for building
a Docker image. University of Information Technology and
CommunicationsBefore learning Docker commands, we need to familiarize ourselves with the concepts:
Docker images, Dockerfiles, containers, and volumes, … to understand the elements of
Dockere. Key elements of Docker
2.
Packaging applications with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container from the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
f.
Main/core directives of Docker
University of Information Technology and
Communications1.FROM  directive :
▪Used  to specify  the base  image  that  the container  will inherit . ▪Each  Dockerfile  must  start  with  at least  one  FROM . ▪Example : FROM  openjdk :11 => Use  the openjdk :11 image  as a base  to build  a
container  to run the Java  application . 2.COPY  directive :
▪Used  to copy  files/folders  from  the host  machine  (where  you  write  the Dockerfile)
into  the container .
▪Example : COPY  target/myapp .war  /usr/local/tomcat/webapps/  => Copy  the
myapp .war  file from  the target  folder  on the host  machine  to the webapps  folder  in
the Tomcat  container . f. Main/core directives of Docker
University of Information Technology and
Communications3.
ADD  directive :
▪Similar  to COPY  but more  powerful  (Can  automatically  extract  .tar files,  Supports  URLs  to
download  files from  the Internet)
▪Example : ADD  https ://example .com/app .tar.gz /app/  => Download  the app .tar.gz file
from  the Internet,  copy  it to /app/  in the container  and  automatically  extract  it. 4. RUN  directive :
▪Used  to run commands  during  the image  build  process,  usually  to install  packages,  set up
the environment .
▪Example : RUN  apt-get update  && apt-get install  -y curl  => Update  the package  list
and  install  the curl  tool  into  the image . f. Main/core directives of Docker
University of Information Technology and
Communications5. ENV  directive :
▪Used  to declare  environment  variables  in the container . ▪Example : ENV  APP_HOME=/usr/local/myapp  => Create  the APP_HOME  environment
variable . Then  it can  be used  in the Dockerfile  or when  the container  is running
6.
WORKDIR  directive :
▪Sets the default  working  directory  in the container . Subsequent  commands  (RUN,  CMD,
COPY ,  …) will be executed  in this directory . ▪Example : dockerfile :
WORKDIR  /app
COPY  . . RUN  javac  Main .java
CMD  ["java" ,  "Main"]Meaning:
▪Set the default working directory to /app. ▪Copy all source code to /app. ▪Compile the Main.java file. ▪When the container runs, execute java
Main. 2.
Packaging Applications with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check Installation & View Docker Commands
e)Key Elements of Docker
f)Main/Core Directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with Basic Directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a New Container from the Image
j)Push the Built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to Test Run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
g.
Create Dockerfile with Basic Directives
❑Example of building a Docker image (containing an Apache web server and a web application)
1.Create a simple web application:
Create a folder named appdocker, containing the index.html file, for example with the following content:
2. Then, in the same folder, create a Dockerfile (without extension) with the content (slide below):
Welcome to my new app
This page is test for my demo Dockerfile.
Enjoy ...
University of Information Technology and
Communications
g. Create Dockerfile with Basic Directives
2) Dockerfile content:
Where:
oFROM Directive: specifies the base image that the container will inherit => httpd (latest version) is the
base image in this example.
=> httpd is the official base image of Apache HTTP Server (the most popular web server in the world) =>
helps to quickly launch an Apache web server in a container (used to deploy static web applications
(HTML, CSS, JS))
oCOPY Directive: executes the image building process. Docker will copy the local index.html file created
into the /usr/local/apache2/htdocs/ directory of the image. University of Information Technology and
CommunicationsFROM httpd:latest
COPY index.html /usr/local/apache2/htdocs/
2.
Packaging Applications with Docker a)Introduction b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows d)Check Installation & View Docker Commands e)Key
Elements of Docker f)Main/Core Directives of Docker g)Create Dockerfile with Basic
Directives h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile i)Initialize a New Container from the
Image j)Push the Built Image to Docker Hub k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to Test Run
University of Information Technology and Communications  ❑Open  a terminal  (PowerShell)
and  navigate  to the directory  containing  the Dockerfile,  then  execute  the docker
build  command  as follows : docker  build  -t demobook :v1 .
▪Where :
✓ The  -t argument  specifies  the name  of the image  and  its tag. In this  example,  the name  of the
image  is demobook  and  its tag is v1. ✓ The  . (dot)  at the end  of the command  specifies  that  we will use  the files  in the current  directory . => Screenshot  of command  execution :h. Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
~ package application using Docker
h.
Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
❑From the running screen, we see that building a Docker image consists of
3 steps:
1)Docker downloads the specified base image (from Docker Hub) (1)
2)Docker copies the index.html file into the image (2)
3)Docker creates and tags the image (3)
Note :
▪If during the execution of the docker build command you encounter the message:
https://registry -1.docker.io/v2/library/httpd/manifests/latest: unauthorized:
incorrect username or password error, try executing the docker logout command.
Then, re -execute the docker build command. h. Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
❑To check if the image has been created successfully, execute the
command:
docker images
=> Screenshot: created successfully
h.
Building a Docker image from Dockerfile Note: ▪To build a Docker image from a .jar file
(Spring Boot or Java app), the Dockerfile will be as follows: ✓Write Dockerfile
(screenshot) ✓After having the Dockerfile, run the image build command: docker build -t
myapp:1.0 Explanation: ✓ docker build: image build command ✓ -t myapp:1.0: attach a tag to
the image (name is myapp, version 1.0) ✓ .: dot (.) ~ build context, meaning Docker takes
the Dockerfile in the current directory# Use JDK runtime (only need JRE if not building in
the container) FROM openjdk:17 -jdk-slim # Set the working directory in the container
WORKDIR /app # Copy the jar file from the host machine to the container COPY myapp.jar
app.jar # Open the application port (e.g., 8080) EXPOSE 8080 # Command to run when the
container starts ENTRYPOINT ["java", " -jar", "app.jar"]  2.
Packaging the application with Docker a)Introduction b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows d)Check installation & view Docker commands e)Key
elements of Docker f)Main/core directives of Docker g)Create Dockerfile with basic
directives h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile i)Initialize a new Container of the
image j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and Communications  ❑After building the Docker image
for the application, we initialize a new container to test run the application, execute
the command: docker run -d --name demoapp -p 8080:80 demobook:v1 oWhere: ✓-d: ~ container
will be in background mode ✓--name: set container name, ✓-p port mapping, port 80 of the
container will be mapped to port 8080 on the host (our PC) ✓demobook:v1: name of the image
and its tag University of Information Technology and Communicationsi.
Initialize a new Container of the image
❑Check the list of running containers using docker ps
University of Information Technology and
Communicationsi. Launch a new container of the image
=> Everything in the container is isolated,
but thanks to port mapping, we can
access the application via the browser at
http://localhost:8080 => Result: The
content of the index.html page is
displayed. Press refresh to test again after stopping the application container. 2.
Packaging the application with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container of the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
j.
Push Image to Docker Hub
❑To share and use Docker images on other computers, we need to push it to a Docker image registry. Docker Hub is a public, free registry. ▪We have registered for Docker Hub (according to the instructions in the previous slides)
=> Screenshot:
University of Information Technology and
Communications
j. Push Image to Docker Hub
1. Log in to Docker Hub
Use the command docker login -u  and enter your password. 2. Get Image ID
Run the docker images command to display a list of images and their IDs. 3.
Tag Image for Docker Hub
Use the image ID to tag: docker tag  /demobook:v1
4. Push Image to Docker Hub
Execute the command docker push docker.io//demobook:v1 => The image
will be uploaded to Docker Hub and can be viewed on the web portal. University of Information Technology and
Communications=> See the push results in the screenshot (slide below)
❑By default,  the image  pushed  to Docker  Hub
is in public  mode  – everyone  can  view  it in the
explorer  and  use  it.
=> It is possible  to create  a private  image  – only  when
we confirm  can the image  be used  (refer  to textbook
[1])j. Push Image to Docker Hub
2.
Packaging the application with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container of the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
k.
Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
Stop the running demobook:v1 container (previously), pull the image from Docker Hub, & test
run
1. View the list of running containers: use the docker ps command
2. Stop the container: run the docker stop  command
3. Pull the Image from Docker Hub: run the docker pull phamthuongdocker/demobook:v1 command
4. Run the container from the image
Execute the command docker run -d -p 8080:80
phamthuongdocker/demobook:v1
University of Information Technology and
Communications5.
Check the application corresponding to the running container
Access: http://localhost:8080Done! 2.
Package the application with Docker
a)Introduction
b)Register & Explore Docker Hub
c)Install Docker Desktop on Windows
d)Check installation & view Docker commands
e)Key elements of Docker
f)Main/core directives of Docker
g)Create Dockerfile with basic directives
h)Building a Docker image from Dockerfile
i)Initialize a new Container of the image
j)Push the built Image to Docker Hub
k)Pull the Image from Docker Hub to test run
University of Information Technology and
Communications
3.
Docker Compose
❑Modern applications rarely operate independently, often
requiring dependent services such as databases or APIs. ▪Docker Compose allows defining and managing multiple
containers in the same application. ▪Docker Compose uses a YAML format configuration file to
describe the services, volumes, and networks that make up
the application
oThat is, instead of running each complex docker run ...
command, we only need to write a docker -compose.yml
file describing the services (applications), then use the
command: docker compose up
o→ Docker will automatically build, create a network, and
launch all containers. Thus: Docker Compose = Managing multi -container applications
(Microservices, Database + Backend + Frontend). University of Information Technology and
Communications
3.
Docker Compose
❑Docker Compose is available in Docker Desktop, we can check with the command:
docker compose version
University of Information Technology and
Communications
3. Docker Compose – Usage Process
University of Information Technology and
Communications1. Create a docker -compose.yml file to define the services. 2.
Execute Docker compose to start the containers described in the YAML configuration file,
run the docker -compose up -d command in the directory containing the file
▪ The –d option runs the containers in detached mode, background mode. ▪ You can verify the running containers with the docker ps command, or through Docker Desktop
2. Container lifecycle management:
▪Stop: docker compose down
▪View log: docker compose logs –f
▪Restart: docker compose restart
University of Information Technology and
Communications3.
Docker Compose – Student Practice
Docker Compose for Java web application + MySQL + Tomcat. ❑Practice, discussion:
▪Suppose we have a Java web application (Maven packages to myapp.war file) and
want to run it on Tomcat. The application needs to connect to the MySQL database. ➢So we will have 2 services in Docker Compose:
✓tomcat → contains Java web application (deploy .war). ✓mysql → database backend. ➢What is the content of the docker -compose.yml file????
Summary & Reinforcement Questions
This lesson has covered the basic concepts of Docker, from creating Dockerfiles and
images to deploying containers locally and to Docker Hub. We've also explored how to
use Docker Compose to manage multiple containers. Key Concepts
•Docker Hub and Docker Desktop
•Dockerfile and Directives
•docker build, run, push commands
•Docker ComposeReinforcement Questions
•What is Docker Hub? •Which directive defines the base image in a Dockerfile? •Which command creates a Docker image?
•Which command publishes an image to Docker Hub? •How does CD differ from continuous deployment? University of Information and Communication
Technology
University of Information and Communication
TechnologyPractice, discussion
JOB #3 & JOB #4 PRACTICE:
SEE HERE
UNIVERSITY OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
FACULTY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
THAI NGUYEN, MONTH … YEAR 2025Thank you!